so your mic is
new yes
okay uh sorry for that yeah
so what i was talking is about the
velocity saturation effect this is one
among the effect
that we have under the uh secondary
effects and
the saturation effect is something like
when the electric field between the
source
and the drain attains a particular
electric field which we call it as a
critical electric field the velocity of
the carrier becomes saturated
so due to which there are a few things
that happens to our device
iv characteristic graphs okay one of the
major thing is that our device will
enter into saturation regime well before
the value of vds is equal to vgs minus
vt okay
because in the long channel device we
always assume that the transistor
enters into saturation regime the moment
the value of vds is equal to vgs minus
vt
okay so that was something a kind of a
well defined
voltage by which i can get to know
whether my device is in saturation or
i'm in the linear region okay but right
now when we use a small channel device
what happens is that uh this
phenomenon never follows like uh we
can't completely define that
our device enters into saturation the
moment the vds is equal to vgs minus vt
but in short the device enters into
saturation
for value of vds that is even smaller
than the value of v just minus vt okay
so due to which what happens is that we
have an extended
saturation regime and the second
physical phenomena that happens is that
the saturation current
is proportional to vgs minus vt okay so
this is something
uh which is different from than compared
to our uh previous
characteristic graphs okay where the
saturation current
for a long channel device was
proportional to v just minus v the whole
square but right now
it is proportional okay so due to which
there is an equal width
when there is an equal increment in the
value of vgs
okay so this is something that we had
addressed in the previous
class and uh also because
the id sat is a function of
kappa of uh vds
yeah so here is this okay so since
because
the idsat is basically a function of vds
what happens is that the current that we
would get
for a short channel a value of vds which
is larger
the copper value we always know that it
will be less than the value of one
due to which the current also gets
reduced okay so these are some of the
physical phenomena that we were
addressing in the previous class and
today i just want to show you about this
characteristic graph plot okay so i just
want to plot this id versus vds graph
through simulation and also if possible
i will try to plot id versus vgs
okay this simulation is just a way to
explain the things okay so
it's not a part of your theory course
but it's part of your lab
i guess right now you could see the
screen right
a different screen yeah
yes so there are a few setups that i
have to do just just grab for some time
so these things you will be learning
later later on during the course
okay so i'm just
trying to show only the graph part of it
so you don't need to worry right now
about why i am setting all these things
so now that i am just going to plot id
versus
vds graph okay and
the value of vgs that it has taken is
0.6 okay so
i have just defined those as a variable
and
right now we are varying the value of
various right from 0 to
1.2 volt and i've kept the value of
wages to be around
0.6 volt okay yeah so this was the
carrot that we have
and i also wanted to plot for
different values of vgs okay not just
for 0.6 i want i just want it for
different values of vgs so what i do is
i have to perform something known as
parametric analysis and
i'll just pull out my vgs and i would
vary the value of vgs from 0 to
1.2 maybe
[Applause]
okay so these are some of the keras and
as you could
clearly see that there is some sort of
quadratic nature
when the value of vgs even even it's a
function of regions as well okay
so but as you move on the spacing that
we have between these two
lines maybe uh i'll change the
background okay
yeah so again there is something known
as uh mobility degradation which happens
because of the vertical electric field
that is created between the
gate and the body okay so
again it's it's a function of both the
mobility
so in this case you could see that the
the spacing that i have here
is as similar to what we have here so
maybe i have to do a lot
a number of let me just try to
step this one
and let me specify the step size that's
point one okay
so i'm just incrementing the value of
vgs in steps of 100 millivolt
yeah so i hope that right now the graphs
are clear to you
you could see that the spacings that you
have is almost like
a kind of equal spacings when i try to
increase the value of wedges in steps of
100 millivolt
is the graphs are clear
but for low values of vgs obviously
it follows some sort of quadratic
relation okay but as you rise the value
of v g s
then again what we have is something
known as mobility degradation there is
again one more effect okay that i will
be discussing now
but this is what happens when we try to
plot it okay so we have equal spacings
in the kind of saturation current okay
and there is no
appropriate region where i can visually
see
the linear region separated out of our
saturation regime okay it's almost like
a kind of linear
graph okay so so something like a kind
of
a smooth graph that happens here okay so
it becomes very hard for us to actually
define whether the transfer is in
saturation or in the linear region
so this is for chart channel transistor
yeah yeah this is for 45 nanometer okay
the length and the width of the channels
are
specified here okay so here in this case
the length of the channel
was 45 nanometer okay now we can
actually mimic
but it's not a real device but what i
can do is that
i can just make this as something like 1
micrometer 1u means 1 micrometer
and i would increase the width to say
for example 10
micrometer okay and there will be a
slight change because the thickness of
the oxide reminds the same for 45
nanometer technology okay so due to
which there will be some sort of
mobility degradation effect we can't
really model
a long-term device just by changing the
length and the width of the
transistors but still we can certainly
see some sort of changes that is
happening
uh
i just make this as one micro micron as
the channel length
and 10 micron as the width of the uh
transistor
of the channel and let me
just get back to parametric
so again we are not entirely changing
the technology we are reusing the 45
nanometer technology itself but
with higher length and rate okay so
certainly there will be some sort of
differences
but you cannot expect some sort of
quadratic nature that i was showing
earlier okay so we have to use the real
technology for it in order to get the
effect okay yeah so the one
towards the right okay so this is
something
for a kind of longer channel okay and
the one towards the left side is for the
shorter channel okay so you could
barely see that there is a kind of
spacing becomes higher and higher
okay whereas the spacings here are
almost equal whereas here there is
some sort of impact that you could see
okay i guess uh
more than this we can't uh really talk
about this just with 45 nanometer i have
to use a completely different technology
to talk about it okay
so that whatever we study in the theory
with quadratic spacing you can really
see those quadratic spacing only for
technologies which are at least a
minimum of 500 nanometer or more than
that okay one micron
technology if we have then those
technologies can be utilized
and we can do the simulation in order to
get the characteristics that we see
normally in our textbooks okay this is
just to show how the graphs have been
brought in and
and you could also see that the
saturation
region barely happens for a value of vds
that is more than a certain value okay
whereas in this case you could see that
the device almost enters into saturation
regime
for even for small values of videos yeah
so now i'll just switch over my screen
so the next
type of impact that i wanted to discuss
is about mobility degradation
now we have already seen something known
as velocity saturation effect
and that velocity saturation effect
happens because of the lateral electric
field that is the field that exists
between the source
and the drain okay but on the other hand
what we have
is a field due to the gate as well okay
because
we know that the gate certainly has some
sort of potential
which is greater than the value of vt
okay so
so this will actually create some sort
of field across the oxide okay
across the thickness of the oxide we
have some sort of electric field
okay which is a constant electric field
that we have studied when we discussed
about the
cv right yeah now even this field will
create some sort of impact
now what we wanted is the free carriers
let me just
choose a an nmos so that i have a p type
as my semiconductor and
once the value of vgs is greater than
the value of vt we know that
it pulls out all the electrons and it
creates some sort of channel here okay
and then we
also know that we have some sort of
repeated uh
region around this entire segment okay
yeah so now what happens is that these
electrons
uh has to move from the source side
towards the drain side
okay and this is our entity operation
but what happens
on the other hand is that the value of
vgs
creates an electric field which we call
as a vertical electric field
which is given as vg by the thickness of
the oxide
okay so now as the technology shrinks
down
the thickness of the oxide becomes less
than nanometer okay
i think at the atomic scale you will
find this thickness of the oxide okay
so this in turn creates some sort of
huge electric field even for small
values of vgs
and that creates a very high electric
field and due to which
one could actually model the mobility of
the carrier
that is effectively being disturbed by
this vertical electric field
as something like mu naught when there
is no field that causes the uh
motion due to the vertical field
and then there is some sort of eta
factor okay uh this is something like a
kind of uh
empirical factor multiplied by the vgs
minus vt okay
so as we raise the value of this radius
minus vt
effectively what happens is that the
mobility of your carrier
becomes slow okay now this can be again
can be shown some sort of
with a comical video okay
as something like this okay
so this is the kind of reporter who just
wants to report something and uh he is
trying to
put himself stand against the strong
wind okay but he couldn't be able to
resist
so what happens is that he couldn't be
able to move uh between the source and
the drain because of the
high uh vertical field towards the storm
okay that flows okay so that makes him
to collide
along the uh wall okay so it is
something like you
okay let me stop this video okay so you
got some sort of an idea
okay so with this idea let me try to
mimic this cartoon
okay so you have some sort of wall
okay and you you want to run between the
source side towards the drain side and
you want to have something like this
but what happens is that there is a
vertical field that is coming from the
other side
uh something like a kind of blower a big
fan okay
okay so you have to assume that this is
a fan okay so there is
no other way and this pan is actually
growing at a very high speed okay so
so due to which what happens is that
this person his original
speed would be much larger but just
because of this blow
his speed would be reduced and in
general what happens is that he collides
at the interface between oxide and the
semiconductor okay rather than he tries
to move freely
he's been hitted on this interface so it
is something like you are trying to run
close to the wall so what happens is
that the speed at which you want to
actually get slow down okay rather than
running in a very uh free space you are
trying to run in a very
cumbersome area so due to which you
cannot run fast okay
and this is the type of impact that we
call that impact as a mobility
degradation this happens because of the
vertical field created by this gate
potential
okay so after this what we have is
something known as channel length
modulation
we have already discussed about this
channel modulation effect in the last
couple of classes i'll just revise okay
i'll not do the derivation here
now under this channel and modulation
i'm just going to assume that the length
of the channel is quite high okay so
in the sense of we are talking about a
saturation current
for a long channel device okay so we
know that that could be written as
ids saturation and
that could be written as half k n dash w
by l
v g s minus v t the whole square and
effectively what happens is that the
length of the channel is
becoming tapper and tapper as we rise
the value of vds okay
so this is the channel that i'm trying
to mark here okay
so this is my channel area where i have
filled with
all charge carriers within this zone
okay
and this happens when we have vds that
is equal to vds
sat okay and as we rise the value of
this vds
beyond the value of vdsat say for
example i am talking about vds1
which is greater than the value of vdsat
what happens is that this channel
is actually getting tappered further
and effectively the length of the
channel has got reduced
where i have filled with carriers okay
so this region is currently been filled
with carriers
but there is a region where i don't have
any carriers here okay so this
particular region is
known is left over with no carriers here
okay
so the effective length across which i
have carriers
has become something like del l
and this is my total length of the
channel
okay and effectively what i have here
is the l minus del l okay
and because of this uh we derived and
showed that it could be written as half
k n dash
w by l into v g s
minus v t the whole square into 1 plus
lambda if we really see this delta l
is actually proportional to delta v d s
so this delta v d s is nothing but
it's a voltage that goes beyond the vds
side
so i could write my vds as a potential
that is offsetted by this vdsat plus any
extra potential that i am giving
can be returned as delta v ds okay so
what happens is that uh we were trying
to
use this relation and then later we
wrote this delta l
to be equal to delta vds but we
introduced
a constant which we called as lambda
prime okay
and later on we also introduced one more
constant which was written as something
like
and due know which one could write
something like delta
vds okay so now what happens is that
this is a kind of cara
where i'm trying to plot with respect to
delta vds
so when you try to plot
the saturation current id is
okay in terms of delta vds
now for a value of delta vds that is
equal to 0
we know that we have some sort of
saturation current and that could be
defined only by this particular quantity
okay
so this quantity let us assume some
value for it
and along the y axis it has some value
now as i raise the value of delta v ds
what happens is that the lambda gets
multiplied with the increase in the
value of this delta v ds and due to
which the graph would normally look
something like a kind of tapered line
okay now
we don't want this camera to be plotted
along the axis where i have delta vds
but what i wanted is a plot
of ideas
versus vds okay i wanted a plot that's
supposed to be
uh running across the value of vds
rather than the value of delta vds okay
and due to which i need to translate
each and every point that i have here
on to this particular plot now in order
to translate from here to here
i have to make use of this equation
where
v d s is nothing but it is defined as
delta v d s
plus v d sat
which i wrote it at the beginning so the
zero point that i have here
when the value of vds delta vds was at
zero i had this particular point
and this point has to be mapped onto
this graph right
so when you try to plug in the value of
this maybe i'll use a different color
okay so this point i want to plot it
over this
vds graph then what i do is that i just
plug in the value of 0
that i have here over here so now what
happens is that
for this current value our vds supposed
to be equal to vds
sat so which means that this particular
point is actually mapping on to
this particular point where the value of
vds is equal to
vds sat okay now this point
again you try to plug in the value that
you have here
okay this value let us assume that it is
delta v d s
one so that delta v s one you would plug
in here
and due to which the same similar point
would be marked over here so
when you try to join all of these points
the same color would be translated
on this particular camera okay and to
define this current
i want to rewrite this saturation
current okay
so how will i rewrite this i have to
change this
delta vds in terms of this vds okay
so my saturation current that i normally
use
to plot it against ideas versus vds
can be rewritten as something like half
k n dash w by
l v g s minus v t the whole square
plus in order to plot on the axis of v d
s i have to write it as lambda times the
rough vds
clear i i think there was some sort of
discussion around this particular point
and this is what i was about to define
uh when you were asking about this
particular doubt okay so i want to
translate on different graph okay and
due to which
this delta vds has to be replaced with
vds so that i can utilize
in the graph that i was trying to plot
uh id versus vds
here yeah so
after this we have but this
expression is valid only after vds set
yeah yeah of course
but we also know that when the value of
vds is less than
vds sat i will not use this current
equation
i will be using the linear current
okay which is defined as gained so i'll
be
using that in order to plot the
remaining part of the graph
so now let us talk about the other
phenomenon that we have is
about the body effect okay so probably
you might be already familiar with this
body effect
now this is a kind of physical phenomena
that happens whenever the source
and the body are at completely different
potentials okay
so what i really mean is that the if
there exists a potential difference
between the source and the body which is
not equal to zero okay
so this condition means that there is a
potential difference between the source
and the body
so in turn you would have studied that
the threshold voltage of
a transistor would then get modified and
that is written as vt naught
plus something like gamma square root of
2 phi f plus vsb
minus square root of 2 phi f okay
now this 2 for i f is basically is a
quantity that
comes through some sort of built in
potential phenomena okay so
sometimes what happens is that they tend
to write it as
pi s and that is nothing but equals to 2
phi f
okay so only thing that you need to note
here is that any value
either it is given in terms of phi f or
phi s do not get confused look at the
value
if the value is around point seven to
point eight use that value
either as two phi f or phi is okay so
the only thing that you have to be
concerned is look for this particular
value
if it is within that range use it in
case
if the value is given as point four or
point
three eight okay then you have to
multiply by a factor of two in order to
get the
so then then this means we what we have
given
is something known as phi f and you need
to multiply that quantity in terms of
two in order to get the
highest quantity okay i hope that i am
not confusing you so i'll just rewrite
this
same expression in terms of phi s so
that both the expressions are conveying
the same thing the way that i would
look at both these expression is by
looking at the value that has been given
for this phi s or phi
f here if the value is fit within this
point seven to point eight
then use that value as it is over here
okay so here
maybe i should have used it
okay so ensure that whatever the value
that you're plugging
is in the range between point seven to
point eight or even point nine it's fine
okay
so if that is the case you use it as it
is else
if the value is given as point four you
multiply by a factor of two and then
plug in that
particular value over here okay so that
is nothing but it's a it's a kind of
threshold voltage
of your diode okay across the pn
junction that we have
for the between the so body and the
source region okay so there is always a
pn junction
will not go much in depth about the
physics behind it but the point is that
uh you look for the range of value that
is given in your question and
use that value accordingly okay yeah but
does this really make sense like i felt
really uh
not good when i just looked at this
expression as it is okay so
what i have done is that i've just tried
to create some sort of picture here
okay so before i talk about this picture
i just want to emphasize about the
what do we really mean by the threshold
voltage okay the real meaning behind the
threshold voltage
now a threshold voltage can be
decomposed that voltage of 0.7 or 0.5
whatever the voltage that we have for a
mass
transfer can be decomposed into two
components okay we are part of the
threshold voltage
let me take this as point six okay just
a
kind of number so a part of this point
six voltage
say for example point four volt okay is
meant to
create depletion region first okay
basically the entire voltage is supposed
to be used for creating the depletion
voltage
maybe i would use that term as well and
a slight bit of voltage is required okay
so maybe around point
five nine volt i would use
and the remaining voltage that we have
could be used
to create a thin layer of channel okay
now these are numbers just the numbers
do not fix your mind to these numbers as
it is okay
because uh sometimes we always tell when
the value of v gs
is equal to vt still the transfer is off
okay so
that is the reason why i'm not trying to
emphasize on this
particular point that the threshold
voltage is meant to create both
basically
we assume that the value of vgs in this
case is required for both
to create the depletion as well as to
create a thin layer of channel
just an assumption okay now let me just
get back the
figure here okay so i have just created
some voltage
that is slightly above the value of vdh
okay so
very tiny bit of voltage more than the
value of
vth so now that it has depleted my
carriers which is given in the dark gray
color
okay so it has depleted the carriers and
like
the majority carries underneath the
channel and also it has pulled out
the electrons so the electrons are shown
as a kind of bubbles
white color circles i guess the pictures
are clear
so if you want i can enlarge a bit
okay so now in order to create this
channel i need almost like
10 uh electrons to create this
particular channel okay
and this is the condition that i have in
vbs when there is no potential
difference between the source
and the body okay so when both these uh
nodes are at the same potential
this is what happens but the moment i
try to apply some sort of potential
difference say for example the source
node is slightly higher than the value
of zero
okay then in that case what happens is
that there is a positive charge
okay and that positive charge will pull
out an electron
out of this particular region okay so
now that
the channel is not completely formed
because uh one of the electron has been
pulled off from the channel that is
created okay
now it is left over with just nine
so now in order to create a channel
i need 10 electrons to completely fill
this particular zone between the
source and the drain okay i need an
extra electron so how will i get that
extra electron
which is a minority carrier so what i
supposed to do
so increasing vg increase yeah
so in in that case i need to increase
the
value of vg okay so in turn i can also
visually see that
the threshold voltage of the device has
also been raised up okay
because for this value i have already
created
the channel as was the depleted region
okay but
just because the vsb is rised higher it
has lost one of the electron and due to
which
the threshold voltage of the device has
also
been shooted up yeah so we are modeling
this
particular physical phenomena through
this particular expression of
vt okay so whenever there is a rise in
the potential difference between the
source and the body the threshold
voltage of the device also rises
okay that is it loses that electron and
i need
an extra voltage to actually create a
very thin layer of channel between the
source and the
body okay so this is something that
gives you a visual feel like
why the threshold voltage of the device
increases the moment
the vsb starts rising okay you may also
wonder like what happens
when you have the reverse condition okay
so say for example i have
negative and a positive here then
obviously you need a very less threshold
voltage okay that's a different story
and
when we talk about a digital vlsi design
we will never encounter this condition
that is we will not have this vsb in the
negative direction just because
the body of our inverse structure will
be at the ground okay
it cannot be pulled to any positive
values due to which our vsb
becomes a negative okay so there won't
be any such situation where the source
is pulled lower than zero volt okay
so that is the condition and uh we
always encounter an increase in the
value of vdh okay
so the next thing that we have to
discuss
is again uh that is related to threshold
voltage
which is known as short channel effect
and
there is also one more effect which is
called as drain
induced
barrier lowering okay
so again all the three effects that i
have discussed including this uh
body effect one and the short channel
effects
two and the third one which is the drain
induced barrier lowering all these
effects are related to the threshold
voltage
okay now in the case of a short channel
device
what happens is that it is the reduction
in the threshold
voltage with respect to the length of
the
channel okay so i'll talk about this
whereas
at drain induced barrier lowering it's a
kind of effect of threshold voltage with
respect to
the value of medials okay so and the
body effect
so which is nothing but it's a steady of
a threshold voltage
with respect to vsb clear so
if i am trying to talk a threshold
voltage with respect to vsb then we call
that effect as a body effect
if i am talking threshold voltage effect
because of the
change in the length of the channel we
are calling that effect as a kind of
short channel effect
and drain induced barrier is an effect
where the threshold voltage of the
device
varies with respect to videos okay so
this
effect comes into picture only for short
channel device
and even the same applicable for this as
well okay
now why does this happen uh when we put
ourselves
into a question the one thing that we
have to note is that we always define
that the threshold voltage is only a
function of
vgs okay a more practical example is
that we always assume that the mother is
the only responsible to
bring up their child okay so this is
something similar to that
and this is the assumption that we had
before okay
but now we know that both the husband
and wife has to play a role
in bringing up the child the same
similar reason can apply
okay so when i get into this short
channel
what happens is that let us look across
this first
physical thing okay as i said a
threshold voltage
has to do two jobs one of the job is to
deplete the charges
okay so that was its major preliminary
job and then later it has to pull
the magnetic carriers now
when i reduce this channel length what
happens is that you can just barely
compare these two things having a very
long channel
and the one that has very shorter
channel
now if this is a an n-mos we have to
have a p-type material a p-type
substrate for both these
structures and the length of this
particular channel is quite
large than compared to the length of the
channel that is required here
now let us try to draw the depleted
region around the pn junction okay
so now in this case we know that the
depletion region surrounds the source
and the drain
okay and we also know that there is a
part of the channel has already been
depleted because of this pn junction
okay and even here a part of the channel
has been depleted
already by this pn junction but as we
compare the length
over which the depleted region is
created this is like
a very very small fraction so we can
approximately say that
in order to create a repeated region for
this threshold voltage
we always assume that it's a function of
one d v g
okay so i have to apply enough vgs
to create a depleted region under this
oxide region okay but when i look here
the length of the channel has already
been reduced
now this pn junction has already
depleted a part of the channel okay
and due to which you no need to create
a depleted region at these junctions
okay all of these charges are being
depleted by this pn junction diodes
itself okay so the only thing is that
you are left over to deplete only this
part of the channel which requires a
very less voltage than compared to
deplete the entire
length of the channel okay so this is in
the case of a
long channel and this is in the case of
a short channel
okay so hope that it is clear so due to
which the threshold voltage that is
required to deplete the charges
underneath the
channel has got reduced okay so now let
us try to plot them physically okay so i
just want
to plot only the graph and we will not
get into the modeling part
as we had for body effect okay so
this is my length and let us assume like
uh we have 45 nanometers
so let me have 45 nanometer and let me
mark almost like one micro meter
and all of these lengths are more than
that okay so now that when you try to
plot this
the threshold voltage will not be a
function of a length
till a particular technology but as as
and when when we try to reduce
the technology as i said due to this
physical reason
the threshold voltage of the device
starts reducing
okay and this is for 45 nanometer
clear so this effect
of reduction in the threshold voltage we
call that effect as a
short channel effect okay
yeah so now can you guess
what could be the drain induced barrier
lowering and how does this impact our
threshold voltage any idea
so that means uh in short channel effect
for 45 nanometers
the vt will be the vt will be very small
in the sense yes yes
yeah but actually if i try to plot the
same thing
in your cadence it will not happen no
the reason behind is that there is some
sort of uh
heavily doped region underneath this uh
layer
which is known as a halo implant doping
okay
and due to which in reality you will not
have this kind of
carrot uh but rather when you try to
plot
this is my vd okay so
versus the length the camera would look
weird you will have a very high
uh threshold voltage and then you would
get something like this
okay and the reason why it has become
something like this is because of the uh
halo implant okay so we will not talk
too much about this implant
how does it behaves and things like that
but because of this reason okay or
it can also be called as a pocket
implant because of this kind of
effect you would find that the short
voltage of the short channel device
is not as i proved theoretically
something like this okay
it is something in another direction and
the reason for this is because of the
fabrication that they
have introduced okay because as you said
once the threshold voltage of the device
becomes very small
it becomes too difficult for us to
control the current flow
because we know that the mass transistor
is a is a voltage controlled current
device
okay so if we are not having the hold on
the
voltage then it becomes difficult for us
to control the flow of current between
the source and the drain
and due to which there are some
fabrication steps that have been taken
and if you want i can show even the
graph of this
but i think we are running out of time
probably in the next class i will show
the graph for this
as well as the drain induced barrier
lowering okay yeah so now
the the only question is that i just
want to end this particular node with
this
discussion what happens to threshold
voltage when we have
vds say for example i take two
values of vds vds when it is equal to
zero volt and the value of vds that is
equal to
some positive voltage like 0.6 volt or
something and
the third one is at 1.2 volt now what
happens to each of these
voltages will the threshold voltage
reminds the same for all
or will it increases
or will it decreases which among these
possible
physical phenomena can happen okay
either constant
as vt or it might increase or it might
decrease so
so you have option a b
as well c and i also forgot to tell
about one more thing uh velocity
saturation effect
uh maybe maybe after this i'll take
another five minutes
uh and then i will leave the class
but you need to come up with the answers
which of the physical phenomena can
happen
so due to means by seeing the challenge
modulation it will decrease most
vt will decrease no as
so as the channel will reduce
no uh what happens where the moment i
increase this potential
if this is my drain what happens the
moment i increase the potential when
compared to the body
what happens to this depleted region is
this p-n junction is reverse past
it's reverse bias so i'm trying to
increase the
reverse bias means that the depleted
region around this segment will also
increase
am i right so what you're actually doing
is that you're trying to deplete most of
the
charges underneath the gate just because
the channel is already small
and you're depleting more of the charges
underneath this
so what happens to the threshold voltage
a part of the job is already done by the
value of vds
he has already depleted for me so the
only job that is left over is to deplete
only this part of the
channel so do i need a very high
threshold voltage or
will the threshold voltage will shrink
down
shrinks down yeah it would reduce right
because
and this effect we call call it as drain
induced barrier lowering okay
but uh certainly isn't it similar to
satellite modulation
modulation is about saturation current
but in this case uh it is about the
threshold voltage is what we are
concerned
that is a current equation okay so but
uh
in both the cases we are just increasing
vds like
of course of course yeah yeah yeah so
like the channel and modulation effect
we can observe even for
channel length uh that is greater than
one micron also
if if you look back the current equation
that i've used for the channel
modulation is still
a long channel current equation only
okay and
as you could guess that as i raise the
value of vds
the value of vt is also reducing and
this is the physical phenomena that
happens only for
very short channel devices okay and we
will not really
worry about this effect when we are
working
across a very long channel like
something like this okay so for channel
length of this
depleting part of the channel doesn't
make much change
but the depletion of the charges becomes
a huge impact when we go for a shorter
channel okay maybe
the one reason that i can give why we
are discussing all of these effects
separately means that we always go for
linear model okay the reason why we are
always interested in linear model is
that
you know that superposition theorem
right say for example uh you have some
two potentials and you want to calculate
the current flow through the device or
something like that okay
and we know that maybe i'm not having
the appropriate
circuit conditions here okay let me just
try to apply some something like this
okay
or maybe a plus three volt or something
so now
now to analyze the whole current that
flows between them what i can do is that
i can
just because the resistance is a linear
device i could model
by taking one voltage at a time and then
try to
add up those results in order to get the
total current okay
so even here it would be always better
to model them
as a separate functions okay so we are
trying to model them as a separate
functions
assuming that these transits are
somewhat linear so that i can
add up those impacts later on okay so
that is what we have studied in the
channel in modulation we we never
considered any of these effects
and we just spoke about only the how the
current varies with respect to vds okay
and we just gave us a kind of separate
name something like that
okay i hope uh you're clear
yes sir uh this drain induced barrier
lowering uh
is it uh dominating only in the short
channel
yes yes this is an impact that happens
only in the short channel
if the length of the channel is more as
i said the depletion around this
uh when we compare to the total
depletion is barely small
okay so the the fraction of depletion
that this vds creates
is a very small tiny amount so we
generally assume that it's only a
function of vgs and we never consider
it as a function of vds okay but the
drain induced barrier lowering
says that the vt is not only a function
of vgs but it's also
a function of vds
okay so it's a function of both these
voltages
and that impact will happen only for
shorter channel device okay
yeah so with this note i just want to
talk about every
last point about the velocity saturation
effect okay so i guess
you might be familiar with this equation
yes
okay so this was the equation that we
have used and what happens is that
in this case you could see that there is
a denominator term that is also a
function of
e so now when i try to plot e versus the
drift velocity
it is not as kind of straight line that
i can plot okay
and i cannot use this straight line
where i
could write the drift velocity to be
equal to mu n times it of
e okay but what happens is that when i
try to plot this as a whole
you would get as a kind of curvature
and then it reaches to the velocity
saturation effect okay
so every time the slope changes so this
becomes very hard for us to really uh
predict the value of things okay so
there is something known as piecewise
modeling so you would have learned
the same thing in your body plot right
whenever you have a pole the gain of
your
system will reduce at a rate of minus 20
db per decade and you can use this
piecewise approximation okay
so yeah as electric field increases we
should get negative and also negative
direction because as you increase
yeah yeah i think all of these proves i
have done uh earlier you can just watch
those videos why we are getting
a drift velocity in terms of this maybe
we will discuss about this because the
electric field is running between the
between the drain and the source and we
are using the
charge carrier flowing from source to
drain so based on that
we have this negative sign getting
changed but
it's basically a function where as i
increase the electric field
the velocity also increases okay
it cannot go the other way since because
it has a negative value
okay yeah so now if at all if i
want to model this as a kind of
piecewise model that we have used like
even in the case of a
kind of bode plot then one could use
this piecewise model as vd that is equal
to
mu n times that of e when the electric
field
is less than the critical electric field
okay
this vd drift policy becomes equal to
saturation velocity
for e that is greater than or equal to
critical electric field okay
so based on this we have had some sort
of question
uh maybe i'll just show you the question
and the answer of this we will discuss
in the next class
okay so because of this approximation
i could write that the drift velocity is
nothing but mobility times the electric
field
whereas the other way around is that
when the electric field
is maybe i have to switch over this
equal symbol here okay then the vsat
would be
equal to mu n times zero of ec okay so
now we have
we one could use this equation where i
need to connect both these
uh expressions okay at electric field
that is equal to e c
then v sat is equal to mu n times that
of easy is what i can write it
okay hope uh this is clear this is the
field that i have
for an electric field that is equal to
ec where i can
equate both these quantities okay so
based on this what one can do is that
one could rewrite the saturation
velocity
v d sat in terms of the critical
electric field
okay and this e c
is nothing but can be written as
v sat divided by mu n okay so we have
this kind of a good relation
that could be derived just by this
approximation
clear so there is a small question here
the critical voltage is what you need to
compute for the pmos transistor
and the pmos transistor has an effective
mobility which is given as
38 centimeter square per volt per second
okay and avalanche saturation
which is around 7 into 10 to the power 7
centimeter
per second okay and you you have to
assume that
we have an abrupt change in the velocity
okay so which means that we are trying
to talk about this kind of field
the one at the blue okay so there is an
abrupt change
from the linear motion to this constant
velocity
here so when you have such condition
what is the
critical voltage that you have assuming
that the channel length of the transfer
is
equal to 200 nanometer okay so i want
you to work out
this particular example okay i guess i
have taken too much of time
i just stopped here